# Stochastic-Finite-Element

This code is developed to perform a stochastic finite element analysis on a linear 2D structure with 1D elements; e.g. beams and bars. This code takes all the information of the material properties, geometries, loadings, and boundary conditions in the format of an input file, discretizes the system into a finer meshing with desired number of elements, calculates the stiffness matrix and solves the equation of equilibrium for the structure. Furthermore, this code also takes the probabilistic characteristics of the input for the stochastic analysis. It is assumed that the only non-deterministic input parameters are the Young’s modulus of the members, thus information regarding the mean values, standard deviations and correlation of these parameters must also be provided in the input file. The output results are the nodal displacements, and reaction forces if the deterministic analysis is selected. For the stochastic analysis, there are several approaches that could be selected to run the stochastic analysis. A summary of the type of output results for different analyses are brought in Table 1. The code is fully automatic in the sense that only the input file must be written in a format of MATLAB script, and by running the FE code, the rest will be done automatically.

In this code different types of stochastic approaches are run, and their performance are compared in terms of accuracy of the results and efficiency to better see how each of them could be utilized for different purposes.
There are also some additional features included in the code for each of which a brief description is brought here:
- 1D elements with varying cross sections along their length could be defined, and depending on the number of elements used for the analysis the accuracy of the approximations could be enhanced.
- Auto-meshing is included in the code, so that the analyst can decide how fine the meshing should be in order to achieve the accuracy of desire. The location of the nodes and elements before and after the meshing will be displayed as a graphical check for the analyst.
- Four different types of elements are defined that could be selected for the analysis: bar with direct stiffness method, complete Bernoulli beam with direct stiffness method, complete Timoshenko beam with direct stiffness method, complete Timoshenko beam with linear shape functions.
- Dummy stiffness check is embedded in the code to give the analyst warnings for any of the following three cases. i) if there is a node that is not connected to the system, ii) if a diagonal element of the global stiffness matrix is zero for a beam element, iii) and finally checks if there is a concentrated load at that degree of freedom. In any of these cases, it informs the analyst to either just verify or fix the issue.
 - For the convenience of the analyst there are multiple ways to define the covariance of the input. The analyst can choose the random variables to be independent, dependent with given correlation matrix defined by the analyst or dependent with certain correlation length and the matrix will be constructed automatically by the code. This means the covariance matrix will be constructed based on the number of elements created by the code with the mesh refinement defined by the analyst.
- If MCS or PRA-B approaches are selected, plots showing the probability distribution of the nodal displacements (along with the plots showing the probability distribution of the reactions forces for MCS) are displayed at the end of the analysis.
There are also 5 test problems for which the results obtained by the code are validated either by basic hand calculations, or by using commercial softwares. For the stochastic analyses, the exact answer is considered to be the one obtained by MCS, and the rest are compared to it.
